Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Elvis Ciara. He is
an Android engineer at dot
learn. You can learn about
them@dotlearndotiodotlearn.io. He's an Android engineer
there. How are you, sir?
I'm fine. I'm good. Thanks
for chatting with me. Where
are you calling from Legos.
Oh, okay. So you're from
Legos, Nigeria. And I read
about you on a, a
post that you wrote on
free code camp.org that you
started programming how many years
ago? That was about those
about eight years ago. Yeah,
about eight years ago. And
what was interesting about it
was that you wrote your
first app was not written
on a, on a computer?
Yes. It was only a
small Nokia phone, Like a
little, like when I think
of a Nokia phone, I
think of a little black
and white phone that plays
snake. Yeah. It's a bit
more advanced than that, but
just the feature, phone, little
small phone within numeric keypad
and small screen, not as
smart as the smartphone. Okay.
So this is, this is
the Nokia 26 90, that
came out in 2010. It
doesn't, it didn't have a
hidden keyboard or flip, open
to a keyboard. You basically
had to have the letters
and you have to type
a key several times to
get a particular character. Really.
So you're saying you just
go like one, one, one,
one, two, two, two, five,
five, five, Exactly the best
type of some words on
it. It was crazy. It
was difficult for me. Unfortunately,
I couldn't, I couldn't get
anyone to get me a
computer and there was nobody
around there that had a
computer. So I was very,
I really wanted to do
everything I wanted to get
into programming, which was driven
by my curiosity too. I,
I spent a lot of
time downloading games because relative
gifts, I was given that
phone a few months. I
mean, so most of my
time was spent going online,
searching for the latest game
to download and all that.
So that's the point. I
was like, how does all
this stuff work out? Do
I type XYZ? Those go
home. And it opens up
this page. So I just
went to Google and I
searched for how to build
a website. So it led
me to the w three
schools and tutorial on history
and we to CSS. So
I, so I saw this
funny looking thing, which echo
HTML tags. I was like,
why can't they impute websites
in English? So I, I
started, I started landing that.
So I knew from the,
from the tutorial they say,
and prerequisites was, you have
a laptop, you have to
type your code. I know
that, but I tried looking
for a computer. I couldn't
get anyone. So I just
to substitute a laptop for
my phone, I went online
to do for an app
I could easily use to
type in, could not, not
know exactly cool. Just texted
it to us. I was
typing the HTML tags. There
are Bluetooth if we hosting
service and then I'll look
at it through my browser.
I'm looking at this phone.
This is one 28 by
one 60. It's a 100
PPI density. It's basically like
a two inch screen, a
couple of centimeters and it's
color though, which is nice,
but that's basically, it, it
was pretty small screen. How
many lines of code could
you see? I think I
could see about six, six
or five. That's when I
go full screen mood. If
I have, Oh, the, if
I have the program to
bow or tied to a
title, but it's like five
or four, depending on the
font size. Hmm. Did you
have to think about storage
space or memory? Did you
run out of space? I
didn't, because I, I was
able to get a memory
card Sonoma Morica at site,
which I put into the
device that was about two
gigabytes of storage and it
was back then, there were
lots of favorite FI's and
since it's a featured for
they'll have what's some of
the apps on the phone,
we are just about 500
kbps 500 kilobytes, 200 kilobytes,
a hundred kilobytes. So space
wasn't really an issue. So
you had large video files
on your phone. Hmm. So
you started doing HTML. You
found a tutorial at w
three schools and you're using
basically notepad and this free
upload, but then you started
doing J to M E
what is J two M
E. So that's Java to
my creation. So that that's,
you, you, you could be
beat ups for the featured
phone using that variant of
Java. So it's not all
like the standard edition stripped
down since that are not
fillable. They're mostly the GUI
parts of Java, which like
the swing swing. The rest
is totally different at the
end, but so it's was
beautiful. This low end devices,
the featured phones or other
devices use use it, or
that is in the waving
that is still Java, but
just the variant of it.
And I guess it runs
televisions and, you know, printers,
mobile phones, you can do
like sensors. Like it was
basically internet of things before
internet of things. Yes, I
did see on the book
when I was done learning,
it's being used in PDAs
pagers and a few other
stuff, but I didn't get
to use it on any
of those devices. I was
only programming for a featured
phone because that was the
only tonight. So you just
said PDAs portable digital assistance.
That reminds me of when
I was writing my first
apps, I wrote on a
Palm pilot and the Palm
pilot was a black and
white screen. That was about
one 60 by one 60,
a very similar kind of
a device, except it didn't
have any internet connectivity. I
didn't have any, any phone
to attach to it. So
I really couldn't program on
it. And I programmed for
it. It had about four
K of memory, but how
did you program on a
feature phone? I mean, you
couldn't compile the Java on
the phone itself, right? Yes.
I couldn't. Luckily for me,
I found it too, which
was, it was also free.
So I can't remember the
program name. So it was
a Russian, the worm was
I, I had to, I
can't remember how I got
to the, but I remember
the sites being in the
Russian language and I, most
of the, most of the
app also was in Russia,
Russia. So I got to
this app that allowed Scott
G to me as the
K mobile, it allows me,
it allows you to write,
do tummy codes, run them
and then Butte an APK,
which sorry, it Jaffa, which
you could easily install, download
and install on any feature
phone. So it's, it's basically
an ID sort of, so
it had the texts, it's
the, does the compilation and
all that. And it gives
you a Jaffa, which you
could just upload. So anyway,
so I was lucky to
send the up. That was
how I was able to
actually come by my fist
up. It seems like this
is 2010, 2011. It seems
like you were compiling in
the cloud before the cloud
exists. I think I must've
J to me that was
around the two, 12 to
13. I started with CSA
JavaScript and I spent like
two, two years before I
moved over to J to
me. So I was using
the app was actually it
wasn't on the cloud per
se. It was running on
the feature phones. So, No,
no, I understand that. I'm
saying that the phone did
not compile it. The cloud
did the Russian website compile
the Java, right? No, it
was actually compiling on your
phone. You don't need to
be online to use the
app. Oh, well what is
the Russian site then too?
That was the, I go
to the app. I don't
have that up from there.
Oh, so the app downloads
and then it does some
magic on the phone. How
long it must have taken
forever to complete. It depends
on what's on the app.
So I realized the more
complex my app gets, the,
the time also increases and
it got to a point
where he couldn't even come
by the app anymore. So
I had to start over
with certain features in the
app and just for it
to compile, I know I
was thinking of something that
I was thinking of having
too much because I couldn't
get it together in one
Jeff, I to comply. Wow.
And just to be clear,
you were typing, you know,
public class, hello world, going
like two, two, two to
three, three, three. Did it
auto-complete or did it, you
know, could you copy paste
and doing the, this seems
pretty slow. There was no
auto complete. So you had
to type, you have to
type that is in the
keyboard, which just like you
say was to, to, to,
to circuitry. Fortunately, I got
so good at it that
I knew how to, so
it's smart. It's like this,
when you type, you have
to it for a few
seconds for you to type
the next thing. So why
do those outside? I use
the arrow key to make
that delay faster. I'll move
on to the next thing.
So I got so used
to read. I wasn't, I
wasn't, you can get as
fast as using a composer,
but I was, I made
it somehow easier for myself.
That sounds amazing. So how
long did it take to,
and this was for a
social media site. You were
basically trying to compete with
Facebook. You were writing your
own Facebook. Yes. So my
first book killer. And how
did that work? Are you,
are you a Facebook killer
now? Did you win? No,
I don't drive cars that
it opened, like, so it
says it was a failure
because I, I, I looked
at products or, or I
looked at product differently back
then. So, and I see
Facebook, I just see this
dollar features that if I'm
able to do the same
thing and create more features
and thrillers, it's probably people
would just, Oh, Facebook doesn't,
how's the sound. He doesn't
have that sound coming back
to the platform. So my
deal was simple for the
social media, just to use
some open source projects and
then build on top of
that. There are two core
features there. One back then
Facebook, the show, your friends
that were online. And they
also the issue that it
was beautiful people you already
knew in real life. So
minus four people in real
life, people, you don't let
strangers and everybody just connect.
So I launched that. It
wasn't good. I was basically
begging people to stay on
the side, trying to give
free stuff on the side
for them to stay well,
it didn't work out. So,
But there was value though.
Don't you think in doing
the work? Like, do you,
I hope you don't regret
the experiment. No, I D
I didn't eat. That was,
that was what I was
lending one. I was just
building mini projects on a
book. When I decided to
take on that project, I
was able to go deep
into it. I have this
feature I want to implement,
and I have to lend
this particular level to be
able to implement it. So
that was when I immediately,
it made me realize or
look up differently. Now I
don't see it that same
way. It's also helped me
in my programming journey, silence
on the field experiment of
field project. So when, how
many different apps did you
write? Cause I know that
you wrote another app that
actually got written up, like
in the newspaper, you had
like thousands of users and
I think you were only
14 at the time. Yes.
I was 14. I, after
my first and field project,
I decided to do something
else. And this time around,
I wanted to, since my
people would be willing to
pay for, so I, I
looked around and I saw
that I could actually make
SMS cheaper for people in
Nigeria. So the idea was
to make, make SMS cheaper
and also make it easy
for you to send messages
to several people back then.
It wasn't, I think most
phones, you couldn't send messages
to multiple people. So let's
say you want to send
any style Christmas message to
all your friends and family
after basically sent to on
send to the second sent
to the third person. So
those are the two core
functionalities I plan to, I
wanted to add to that.
So that was when I
stopped. I stopped. That was
when I was still any
Java. So I had to
build the app. I couldn't,
I couldn't afford anyone to
work on the website or
the backend for me. So
I do the up, built
the backend, which the Apple
stock into. And I also
viewed the landing page rage.
You get to download the
options. Those know there's basically
no official app store for
the feature phone. So you
must let you most likely
be hosting your up on
your website or something like
that. So that was my
second big, big project. And
it went well, but I
couldn't, I guess I didn't
handle it properly back then.
And it's, I think it's
just stayed around for about
a year or two before
I shut it down. Hmm.
At this point, had you
moved over to a laptop?
No, I was, I was
still programming with my phone.
How long did you spend
on the phone doing your
programming in a small world?
In a small environment? I
spent all holiday like after
school every, every day, like
school holidays. So I was
basically on this phone. I
also was able to convince
a bunch of people to
give me phone batteries, to
use instead of backup powers.
And you did this for
a couple of years? Yes,
I did that for about,
yes. I think once I,
I think about three or
four years or so. And
you went, when did you
go like and get like
upgrade to a laptop and
did you have to go
to internet cafes or did
you, how did you get
your internet when you moved
off the phone? I got,
I got my laptop. Those
two 14. I had to,
I was, I got a
modem for that. So I
was, I just paid for
a subscription and was using
that on the laptop. It
was sort of, I still
remember the experience of a
very cool, awesome moment for
me. Hmm. Do, do you
still, I'm just curious, but
do you still have the
phone, like in a drawer
somewhere Unfortunately died. I used
it too much. I only
just said, okay dude, this
too much, you're killing me.
I was thinking that if
you're, when you get famous,
you're going to have to
go to the museum and
it'll be on the wall.
And it'll say this here's
where Elvis is the Nokia
26 90, I guess it
should be. So at I
kept it no longer life.
Yeah. Interesting. So do you,
do you know a lot
of people who are writing
apps this way? Cause it
seems very constrained. And I'm
curious, do you think it
makes you a better programmer
now? Like not everyone learned
this way. Right? Some people
they started on a laptop.
Do you think you're more
parent? Like you're more careful
because you started small. Okay.
I want, I don't think
much to people that are
this way either didn't have
the perseverance to do it
that much until they were
able to get a laptop.
For me, it was I
think, ignorance or something or
love for the arts. I
ended up spending a lot
of time, hoping out just
beauty, big thing. And all
of a sudden I will
be on movies, something like
that. So I had this
determination to keep using the
phone, but currently I, well,
it, it made me like,
I, you could wake me
up in the morning and
I like, I remember most
of the jealous syntax. I
know that's mostly for white
whiteboard interviews type of questions
that they ask you for
syntax and stuff like that.
Basically I would prefer like
currently I'm trying to help
a few developers that don't
have access to a laptop
now to get, to get
laptops for them. That's that's
not going to Smith economic,
but cause I don't really
want people to spend time
doing that as you probably
spend time trying to solve
a problem, not taking three
months to Butte on up,
that's probably would have taken
them two weeks or one
month to two. If they
had a laptop or a
computer On your, on your
medium post, you said you're
from the village in the,
in the U S here
we have basically cities. And
then we have like small
towns or farming towns. And
the farther away from the
city, you get the worse
the internet is. And the
less access you have, my
brother lives on a farm
and they don't have, like,
they don't have wired internet.
They don't have, they, they
can't buy internet cause they're
too far away. So I
don't know if that's a
village, but it's pretty far
out, you know, there's, he
can't see his neighbors kind
of thing. How far out
is the village in Nigeria?
And what is the difference
between people who live there
versus people who live in
an apartment in the city?
Okay. I think the definition
of village is basically the
same thing like in the
States. So you have this
far faraway placed us disconnected
from a few basic. I
think now technically I refer
to where I was from
very, very small town. That
was boom. I moved, I
moved to Legos and that
was last, last two years,
I was two 16. It's
been totally different. The whole
experience Lego's has been to
Taleo. So Legos I'm in
Nigeria is the tech ecosystem.
Yeah, it's the Silicon Valley.
If I'm to relate it
to something, that's just going
to be like the Silicon
Valley of the U S.
So we have this tech
ecosystem here. We have several
huge companies working on various
and stuff. We have under
large training, future badass developers.
We have eCommerce shopping sites,
conga, Jamia, and a couple
of them. So when I'm
moving, moving from the village
to the city, you get
all these opportunities. You must
let know, get in the
village. I mean, you get
access to the internet, steady,
steady parts, apply, and lots
of stuff, basically very different
villages. Very similar description that
you gave is exactly the
same thing in nature. But
port Harcourt is a, is
still like a couple million
people, I assume you were
outside port Harcourt. Yes. It's
just a very small place
in potako. And I will
say it wasn't really, it
doesn't really developed so developed,
but I think just like
I said, I technically refer
to it as a very,
very small town. So not
poor heart, not port Harcourt
yourself, but the count outside
that you'd stayed in, maybe
how many people you think
are there. The estimate of,
okay, I'll say about, I'm
not sure I can give
an estimate. I think I
didn't really go out much.
Well, you're working you're on
your phone, your phone programming.
How was it? Was it
when you moved to Legos?
Was it something where you
needed to get a job
and you used your app
kind of as the interview
and you said, here's this
app I built When I
moved to Legos. So I
was freelancing from potako. What
can you explain? So across
Nigeria. So I eventually worked
with this clients that was
very impressed with what I
did for him and invited
me to come over. Like
they had this, they have
this opening for more by
developer position and just invited
me to come for, to
work with them. So that
was when I moved to
Legos. I just had this
call on, I think, Saturday.
And I booked my flights
the next Monday. I didn't
really plan much just so
I, I, I moved over
to Legos for food sign
rule, and it goes out
to company code and very
cool technologies then to making
apps and content for tutoring.
So what's and I worked
with, I worked with them
for a few months before
moving over to Dr. Lane. So
what does that learn do?
Okay. Basically it's an ed
tech startup. So we, we
created a technology to MIT
is able to compress them
if we're able to reduce
the fat and the file
size of videos to about
depending on what the video
content is, it can compression
rates of it could get
a video of one minute
for about 200 kilobytes or
a hundred kilobytes, depending on
the context of the video.
So we developed a stick
that represents videos rather than
frame by frame. We have
this big sales. I know
that you have text instructions
that describe what is on
the screen, how this animate
from point a to point
B. I know that. So
by the end that you
could represent things like videos,
I mean, Khan Academy or
coding screencasts and the very,
very data lights that the
lights fire. Hm. How many,
so are most people on
Android now in 2018 in
Nigeria? Most people have a
small Android phones or do
you see J two MES
anymore? And do they, how
do people watch their videos?
Yes, , that's, it's the
rapid growth of adoption rate
of smartphones share. You still
have. I think when I
checked the numbers, if I'm
not mistaken, I think it's
Starbucks is 70 to 30%.
Hmm. So we have 74
GTM phones and you have
data for smartphones that's if
I'm messing up with the
numbers. So it still represents
lots of, lots of easy
to buy both over time.
Like I think by two
twins. So have smartphones went
in because we have a
bunch of companies bringing in
Android phones, introducing different Android
phones. And most people I
see when I'm in Africa
and mostly I'm in East
Africa and South Africa, but I
see Huawei and Samsung phones.
Techno maybe. Yes. There's no,
probably dealer players very popular.
So they partner with lots
of local local guys here
and able to show this
phones here. So you most
likely see it techno or
any of this look, other
players compared to Samsung or
an iPhone or something like
that. And do you, do
you still do any J
QME, are you trying to
get dot learn on these
smaller phones or does what's
the minimum phone for, for
dollar? So we have, you
could play the videos using
on the web or you
could, we have libraries for
Android and iOS and I,
we haven't posted the library
yet for digital me platform.
That's most likely something that
we'll do myself. This has
been long. I did anything
with this data, JT, I
mean books. And I understand
that the library of content
that you have is also
Africa focused. You're an education
company, but also focused on
education in Africa. Yes. In
Africa. So we noticed the,
we, we, we did, we
did a test that was
saying Ghana. We realized that
most students with locally created
content versus we shouldn't look
at the critic, contents and
content from  and there
was strong preference for the
locally created content. Very cool.
And have you done much
iOS development or do you
see any iOS over there?
I haven't done much iOS
development I as the, or
iPhone, not the majority. So
if you're looking at, in,
in general focus thing, you
most likely be looking at
either Jamie or Android? Well,
I've seen several iOS developers.
Okay. And is that your
plan right now is to
focus mostly on, on Android
apps. And by the way,
I never asked you, did
you do any kind of
a formal education or do
you see a lot of
people going to college for,
for mobile development in Nigeria?
Yes. So I've seen several
people and go to college
study, computer science, not mobile
development. Specifically, you pick that
up from online. Like most
developers are saying, yeah, I
had a self taught or
they went to bootcamp or
coding program that they use
to kick starts their career
in mobile app development. But
now that you are a
working developer, do you feel
any need to go to
school or do you think
that you pretty much are
on your way? Yes. I
feel very strongly to go
to college. I, I believe
I'm very interested in computer
and I believe going to
college, we're very long way
in. I'm going to learn
a lot and be exposed
to lots of migraines to
college. And I don't know,
I just feel I should
get this thing and just
get you to vote rather
than just everybody actually in
my mom, my dad had
seen Elvis was up or
something like that. So people
can check you out on
Twitter, you're at Elvis and
let her N and then
cetara Chi, D E R
a L as in Shira.
I'll put a link to
your Twitter in the, in
the show notes and also
a link to your article
on medium about how you
went from programming, a Nokia
feature phone to working for
a startup. Thanks for chatting
with me today. Yeah. Thanks.
This has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and we'll
see you again next week.